'volta use' to replace 'install' and 'pin' (#52)
volta-cli/rfcs: text/0000-volta-use.md

Notably, we will _not_ be removing the existing `volta install` and `volta pin` commands right away. They will continue to work as they already do. In the future, we might consider adding notifications to them to point users to the updated command, but for the initial implementation we don't want to disrupt current users' workflows.

All that said, the new command should simplify things a lot, especially for new users. It will allow us to explain Volta by saying that you pick a version with `volta use`, and don't worry about installing it: Volta will handle making it available. It also should do a better job of living up to the claim on our website by truly having a _single_ command that users can run to get set up.

# Details

[details]: #details

## Command definition

```
USAGE:
    volta use [FLAGS] <tool[@version]>...

FLAGS:

>     -g, --global    Select the global version of a tool, which is used everywhere outside of pinned projects

Reviewer: Historically, at least, we have always used the language of “defaults” rather than “globals” to distinguish that Volta’s mental model is a bit different.

```suggestion
    -d, --default    Select the default version of a tool, which is used everywhere outside of pinned projects
```

    -p, --pin       Pin a version of a tool to the local project, creating a Volta entry in package.json

ARGS:
    <tool[@version]>... Tools to make available, like `node@lts` or `yarn@^1.14`
```

## Behavior

> The behavior of `volta use` will ultimately be the same as the current `volta install` or `volta pin`. However, when run without flags, it will be contextual, based on where the command is being run. So if a user runs `volta use node@18` in a pinned project, the project will be updated to reflect the newly selected version. If they instead run `volta use node@18` _outside_ of a pinned project, then the default Node version will be updated. This ensures that running `volta use node@version` will always update the version that is currently active, meaning the next run of `node` will use that updated version.

Reviewer: I am mulling on the design here in general and my reaction to it, and I could probably go either way on the overall collapsing of `install` and `pin` into a single `use` verb, but I *deeply* dislike this kind of contextual behavior as a user of this kind of tool. The reason I dislike it is that I want the same command to behave the same way given the same arguments. This feels like a case of “global mutable state”, i.e. the directory I am running in and whether it happens to have had a `package.json` file added to it or not, affecting the behavior of a function call, and I personally prefer to *avoid* my `static mut` values. 😆 It seems particularly iffy to me in that it *also* gets changed by whether there is a `package.json` in a directory anywhere between me and my home directory at the time it happens.

Consider a hypothetical folder layout:

```
/users/chris/code/
  DefinitelyTyped/
    DefinitelyTyped/
      package.json
      types/
        react/
          package.json
          ...
  volta-cli/
    package.json # notice this file
    rfcs/
    volta/
      src/
      some-node-support-script/
      ...
```

I will get completely different behaviors from `volta use node@lts` in each of these directories:

- `/users/chris/code`: sets the default
- `/users/chris/code/DefinitelyTyped`: sets the default
- `/users/chris/code/DefinitelyTyped/DefinitelyTyped`: sets the DT project
- `/users/chris/code/DefinitelyTyped/DefinitelyTyped/types`: sets the DT project
- `/users/chris/code/DefinitelyTyped/DefinitelyTyped/types/react`: sets the React project w/in DT
- `/users/chris/code/volta-cli/volta/`: sets the `volta-cli` default
- `/users/chris/code/volta-cli/volta/some-node-support-script/`: sets the `volta-cli` default

This is all internall consistent, and it is comprehensible, but I don’t find it *obvious*, specifically because it is *so* non-local. Scripts could of course make sure to always do the right thing by explicitly passing `--pin` or `--global`, but I do not like that they *need* to.

Also, I note don’t think we have any other command that works quite that contextually. `volta list` is close, but it just shows you the full hierarchy or your tools. If you are not in a project, you *only* get default/global-installed tools listed, but you will get those listed, with our shadowing rules applied, when you *are* in a package as well.

🤔

Thinking out loud a bit here: What if we more or less “renamed” `pin` to `use` and added `--default` to it? That eliminates all the ambiguity above, always behaves the same way, and still gets us all the *conceptual* simplification of having a single command that does what it says on the tin. It comes with the slight extra typing cost of `volta use --default node@lts` instead of “just working”. However, I think that tradeoff is probably worth it.

I would not fight *especially* hard about this, and definitely would not block on it, but I definitely prefer this design. Thoughts?

Author: To start off, I agree that I don't like tools doing surprising or unintuitive things for inscrutable reasons. Balancing against that, however, are a couple points:

1. I _really_ dislike when tools give an error message that makes it clear they know what you intended, instead of doing the thing. We already have that a little when running `volta pin` outside of a package, but unifying the verbs but then having errors on `volta use npm@latest` that say `Did you mean "volta use --default npm@latest"` feels like going in the wrong direction.
2. We do have contextual behavior in the app already: The shims themselves! The core behavior of Volta is to provide this kind of contextual execution based on where you are when running a command.

That said, the point about `volta use node` is a great callout, since the "pin" case of that is the one entry point to _writing_ the `"volta"` key into an otherwise un-volta-fied `package.json` in the first place. The possibility of writing a config to a file _somewhere_, but it not being immediately obvious where, definitely feels like it will lead to hard-to-debug issues.

Also thinking out loud: I wonder if it would be clearer if we migrated to using a `.voltarc` for our "in-package" state and then made `volta use` only _create_ the file with a flag? That way the impact of calling `volta use` would be limited to modifying the existing `.voltarc` files, which very clearly indicate a connection with Volta.

Reviewer: Yeah, I also share (1) though I also have come around on that over time because it's really easy for a tool to do the *wrong* thing on the assumption that the interpretation there is the correct one, and saying "You *might* have meant this; if so here's how to do it" increasingly seems better to me over time.

On (2) I thought I wrote as much above, but I didn't! I must have thought of it *later*. Shower mode brain or something. 😂 I think the difference, to me, is in the weird and admittedly extremely fuzzy distinction between “I am proactively trying to do something with Volta” in the `volta use` (or `pin` or whatever) case vs. “I am passively letting Volta act transparently on my behalf while doing something *else*” in the `node some-script.js` case. That is, again, *exceedingly* fuzzy, but I think it is part of what is motivating my intuition here. Take it for what it is worth. 😝

Author: Ultimately I agree that the contextual behavior has too many corner cases & opportunities for really poor UX. Updated the proposal to always use `volta pin` but with an explicit flag to indicate pinning the default version.

### `--pin`

Similarly, `volta use --pin` will work identically to the current `volta pin`, always updating the current project. This includes creating a `volta` key in `package.json` if it isn't there already.

## Implementation

The technical implementation of `volta use` should be fairly straightforward. The new command will use the flags and context (i.e. if we are currently in a pinned project or did the user pass `--global`) to determine whether the behavior should be equivalent to `volta install` or `volta pin`. It will then delegate to the appropriate existing command behavior based on that determination. The ultimate flow should be:

- If `--global` was set -> use `volta install` behavior
- If `--pin` was set -> use `volta pin` behavior
- If _both_ were set, error (this can be handled by Clap I believe by making the two flags exclusive)
- If neither flag was set:
  - If we are in a pinned project (one that already has a `"volta"` key in `package.json`) -> use `volta pin` behavior.
  - Otherwise, use `volta install` behavior.

# Critique

[critique]: #critique

## Confusion around omitting version

> One nice part about the existing `volta install` and `volta pin` commands is that they naturally work well with choosing a tool without selecting a version. For example, running `volta install node` makes intuitive sense as "pick whatever version and make it available." By contrast, `volta use node` doesn't immediately (to me, at least!) jump out as _picking_ a version of Node. `volta use node@lts` or similar, _do_ make sense, but omitting the version feels a little more awkward with `use` as the verb.

Reviewer: One alternative this suggests is to actually *not* change `pin` to `use`, and just to stick with `pin`, but add the `--default` flag to it. That eliminates this oddity (which is, you are right, fairly significant!), and also gets rid of the need to introduce a new verb.

One thing that makes me think of: given that part of the motivation is that `pin` does not *necessarily* imply fetching, and that we *do* have a `fetch` command, what if we added a `--no-fetch` flag to `pin` as well? That feels to me like a really clear mental model:

> `pin` sets the version you ask for, and as a convenience, also fetches it if you don’t have it. If you want to `pin` a version *without* fetching it, you can run `pin --no-fetch`.

One nice thing that could unlock is the ability to set a version in a nice way while working offline. That would make it easy to use `volta pin` in e.g. project boilerplate generation without a network connection, for example. I have no idea if anyone wants that latter capability, but having it work offline, e.g. on a plane, even if that means I won’t be able to run using that, seems nice in some ways.

Author: I still need to let it rattle around my brain a bit, but the more I think about it, the more I'm coming around to the idea of `volta pin --default`. I do really like the verb making it clear what's happening, and adding a `--no-fetch` option would further cement the mental model.

Author: It's slow-moving, but letting this ruminate on some of my recent runs, I really like keeping `pin` as the verb. It already clearly indicates the important part of the operation: pinning the version to use. When I get some free time during the long weekend, I'm planning to update this RFC to reflect that approach.

The main sticking point I have is that I think we want a good "short" flag for pinning the default version to make it short to type out, especially for the "Getting Started" guide. Using `--default` as the long flag doesn't work great, because the short version `-d` intuitively makes me think of a "delete" operation, rather than a "default".

While I know we've generally used `default` instead of `global`, I wonder if using `--global` here would make sense. It would align with people's experiences with package managers to make it clear what `volta pin -g node` means. Also, part of Volta's value prop is that it makes "globals" like Node, npm, and 3rd-party packages safe to use by delegating to the local version when it's available.

Author: Finally got around to updating this RFC to the proposal of `--default`. I went with `-d` and `--default`, but also left the `--global` option as one of the critiques. I'm fairly ambivalent, and maybe there's a secret third thing we could find that would work as a better adjective for the behavior.

## Changing only the verb for `install`

One alternative would be to only change the verb for `install`, leaving `pin` completely untouched. This would be the least disruptive change, however it's very dependent on the verb / command that we choose. With the proposal of `volta use`, it would feel very unintuitive to run `volta use node@21` in a project, and then immediately get a message that it's set as the global but your local settings override. As a user, I would expect `volta use node@21` to mean the next call to `node --version` to display Node 21 is running. In order to make that work as users expect, we need to unify the two so that `volta use` _does_ actually change the Node for the current context.

> Another difficulty of the unified behavior is that it's more difficult to explain when users run into edge cases. Right now there's a clear separation between "local" and "global" with two different commands. Unifying them means we'll need to clearly document how `volta use` behaves in each situation, and how to override that (with the `--global` or `--pin` flags).

Reviewer: This is basically exactly my point above. 😂 I take it to be the most significant drawback, and I think it is the thing which really mashes my buttons.

## `volta default` or `volta global`

In the vein of replacing the verb for `install`, I also considered `default` or `global` for the command. The major issue with those is that they're adjectives, rather than verbs, so it's not immediately clear what the command means. Does `volta default node` mean "choose a default node" or "list the current default node"? That confusion is ultimately why I decided against using either of these for the command.

## `volta set`

> Another possibility for the command would be to make it more verbose, e.g. `volta set default node`. That solves the problems around `volta default` or `volta global` by adding a verb to make it very clear what you are doing. However, it makes the commands a fair bit more cumbersome to use, which I feel is ultimately a net negative compared to a single command.

Author: One idea here may be to use `volta set` as the new command, rather than `volta use`. That makes it even more clear that the important part of the operation is setting the version, however it breaks from users expectations from other tools.

> Another possibility for the command would be to make it more verbose, e.g. `volta set default node`. That solves the problems around `volta default` or `volta global` by adding a verb to make it very clear what you are doing. However, it makes the commands a fair bit more cumbersome to use, which I feel is ultimately a net negative compared to a single command.

Reviewer: 👍🏼 to these; I agree quite strongly!

# Unresolved questions

[unresolved]: #unresolved-questions

> - How do we handle the fact that you can install a 3rd-party package globally, but for a pinned project, we require users to install them normally using their package manager of choice? That is, what should we do when a user runs `volta use typescript` while they are in a package that is pinned?

Reviewer: I see two options here:

1. Keep `install` around for *only* this, deprecating its use for installing runtimes.
2. Get rid of `volta install` entirely, and just teach people to use the package manager’s global installation tool (but have docs explaining it).

I personally understand why we added support for package-manager-based global installations but also think it significantly muddied our mental model *and* complicated things for end users, since it *doesn’t* work like the regular command does. Given that, it is probably not surprising that I like (1) here better. However, as things stand, I think (2) might actually be the cleaner path, my own personal preferences be darned. 😂

Author: Yeah, I think I would lean towards (2) given that we have the global interception and the two are generally the same (`volta install {package}` ultimately uses `npm i -g` internally anyway). That would also let us fully deprecate `volta install` while also simplifying `volta use` to be exclusively for defining the toolchain.
